# SAFEcert

I took a class called Collaborative Design during my sophomore spring, in which we were tasked with understanding a people group and developing a product to improve their lives. My team's people group was service animal trainers.

During phase one of the project, we interviewed several service animal trainers in the Boston area to understand what it was like being a service animal trainer. We learned the terminology, their day-to-day, their aspirations, grievances, and successes. From these interviews, we created personas - three imaginary people with traits that represent our people group. We could then ask how these personas would react in different scenarios or how they would (or would not) benefit from different products.

In phase two of the project, we generated ideas for possible solutions to develop. We came up with a treat-free enrichment toy, a puppy-raising app for puppy raisers to communicate with their organization, and a customizable website each service animal trainer could make for their dogs to nonverbally explain do's and don'ts of interacting with their animal, along with many, many other ideas. We eventually settled on SAFEcert - an organization to train and certify businesses in interacting with service animals, their trainers, and their handlers.

SAFEcert came as a seemingly contradictory pair of insights we gathered in earlier phases. First, service animal trainers greatly value public education. For example, people will often come up and try to pet or even purposefully "test" the service animal when they and their trainer are in public. Additionally, certain businesses will ask people with service animals to leave, which is illegal. On the flip side, many service animal trainers and handlers value discretion and privacy even more than public education. They want to be left alone, and treated like everyone else is - it is better both for them and for the dogs! So, although they value education, they do not have the time, energy, or capacity to train the public on their own. This is where SAFEcert comes in. SAFE stands for Service Animal Friendliness Education, and the organization's goal is to educate businesses on how to interact with service animals, their handlers, and their trainers, along with the laws surrounding service animals. The goal is that employees will be better equipped to handle any conflict, should it arise between patrons, while treating service animal trainers with the dignity and respect they deserve. Please see [our final poster](assets/safecert-poster.pdf) and [website mockup](assets/safecert-website.pdf).
